Sample using TransactionalSession with CosmosDB transactions (#5792)
Particular/docs.particular.net: samples/transactional-session/cosmosdb/sample.md

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    Frontend->>ITransactionalSession: Commit()
    activate ITransactionalSession
    ITransactionalSession->>CosmosDB: Store(order)
    ITransactionalSession->>Queue: Publish(orderReceived)
    ITransactionalSession-->>Frontend:
    deactivate ITransactionalSession
    Queue->>Backend: Process(orderReceived)
    activate Backend
    Backend->>CosmosDB: Update(order)
    Backend-->>Queue:
    deactivate Backend
```

The database and transport operations are executed atomically when the session is committed. If the session is aborted, all database and transport operations are rolled back.

## Prerequisites

The sample is intended to be used with the [CosmosDB emulator](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cosmos-db/local-emulator?tabs=ssl-netstd21) to run locally. Alternatively, a connection string to an Azure CosmosDB instance can be provided.

## Configuration

### Frontend

The `Frontend` service needs to enable the transactional session feature in the endpoint configuration:

snippet: cosmos-txsession-frontend-config

> Note that the `Outbox` feature must be enabled to achieve atomicity with the transactional session feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: The `Outbox` feature must be enabled to achieve atomicity with the transactional session feature.
```

---
title: Using Transactional Session with CosmosDB
reviewed: 2022-07-20
component: Core
related:
- nservicebus/messaging/transactionalsession
---

> This sample uses the transactional session package with the CosmosDB persistence package to achieve transactionally consistent database changes and message operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This sample uses the `NServiceBus.TransactionalSession`-package with the `NServiceBus.Persistence.CosmosDB`-package to achieve transactionally consistent database changes and message operations.
```

> downloadbutton

Reviewer 2: Is this a thing? 😮

Author: apparently, that was copied from other sample doc pages 😄

## Overview

> The sample contains a frontend and a backend service sharing a CosmosDB database instance. When the transactional session on the frontend is commited, an `Order` document is created with the status `Received` and an `OrderReceived` event is published. The backend service subscribes to the event and loads the order document to update it's status to `Accepted`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The sample contains a frontend and a backend service both accessing the same CosmosDB database instance. When the `TransactionalSession` on the frontend is committed, an `Order` document is created with the status `Received` and an `OrderReceived` event is published. The backend service subscribes to the event and loads the order document to update its status to `Accepted`.
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    Frontend->>ITransactionalSession: Commit()
    activate ITransactionalSession
    ITransactionalSession->>CosmosDB: Store(order)
    ITransactionalSession->>Queue: Publish(orderReceived)
    ITransactionalSession-->>Frontend: 
    deactivate ITransactionalSession
    Queue->>Backend: Process(orderReceived)
    activate Backend
    Backend->>CosmosDB: Update(order)
    Backend-->>Queue: 
    deactivate Backend
```

> The database and transport operations are executed atomically when the session is committed. If the session is aborted all database and transport operations are rolled back.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The database and transport operations are executed atomically when the session is committed. If the session is aborted, all database and transport operations are rolled back.
```

## Prerequisties

The sample is intended to be used with the [CosmosDB emulator](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cosmos-db/local-emulator?tabs=ssl-netstd21) to run locally. Alternatively, a connection string to an Azure CosmosDB instance can be provided.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Configuration

### Frontend

> The `Frontend` service needs to enable the transactional storage feature in the endpoint configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Frontend` service needs to enable the transactional session feature in the endpoint configuration:
```

snippet: cosmos-txsession-frontend-config

> Note that the `Outbox` feature must be enabled for the transactional session feature to work.

Reviewer 2: Should we elaborate more on this? Or do we leave the batched scenario exclusively for the docs?

Author: I think that's for other docs

> The endpoint is also configured to use CosmosDB persister with a default container and partition key path:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The endpoint is also configured to use the CosmosDB persistence with a default container and partition key path:
```

snippet: cosmos-txsession-frontend-persistence

### Backend

> The `Backend` service contains a message handler for the `OrderReceived` event. CosmosDB also needs to be configured for CosmosDB:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Backend` service contains a message handler for the `OrderReceived` event. The `Backend` endpoint also needs to be configured for CosmosDB:
```

snippet: cosmos-txsession-backend-persistence

> Note that the backend needs a partition key mapping configured for the `OrderReceived` to determine what partition needs to be used to access the order.

Reviewer 2: Can we link to the docs on partitioning here?

> Note that the backend needs a partition key mapping configured for the `OrderReceived` to determine what partition needs to be used to access the order.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that the backend needs a [partition key mapping](/persistence/cosmosdb/transactions.md#specifying-the-partitionkey-to-use-for-the-transaction) configured for the `OrderReceived` to determine what partition needs to be used to access the order.
```

## Running the sample

> Start the `Frontend` and `Backend` services.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start the `Frontend` and `Backend` endpoints.
```
